Add initial guide for Hibernate Reactive (#22988)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/hibernate-reactive.adoc

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Using Hibernate Reactive

include::./attributes.adoc[]
:config-file: application.properties

> :reactive-doc-url-prefix: http://hibernate.org/reactive/documentation/1.1/reference/html_single/#getting-started

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:reactive-doc-url-prefix: https://hibernate.org/reactive/documentation/1.1/reference/html_single/#getting-started
```

link:https://hibernate.org/reactive/[Hibernate Reactive] is a reactive API for Hibernate ORM, supporting non-blocking database drivers
and a reactive style of interaction with the database.

[NOTE]
----
Hibernate Reactive works with the same annotations and most of the configuration described in the
xref:quarkus-hibernate-orm.adoc[Hibernate ORM guide]. This guide will only focus on what's specific

> for Hibernate Reactive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for Hibernate Reactive.
```

----

== Solution

We recommend that you follow the instructions in the next sections and create the application step by step.
However, you can go right to the completed example.

Clone the Git repository: `git clone {quickstarts-clone-url}`, or download an {quickstarts-archive-url}[archive].

The solution is located in the `hibernate-reactive-quickstart` {quickstarts-tree-url}/hibernate-reactive-quickstart[directory].

[[hr-getting-started]]
== Setting up and configuring Hibernate Reactive

When using Hibernate Reactive in Quarkus, you need to:

* add your configuration settings in `{config-file}`

> * annotate your entities with `@Entity` and any other mapping annotation as usual

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* annotate your entities with `@Entity` and any other mapping annotations as usual
```

Other configuration needs have been automated: Quarkus will make some opinionated choices and educated guesses.

Add the following dependencies to your project:

* the Hibernate Reactive extension: `io.quarkus:quarkus-hibernate-reactive`
* the Vert.x SQL client for the database of your choice; the following options are available:
  - `quarkus-reactive-pg-client` for link:https://vertx.io/docs/vertx-pg-client/java[PostgreSQL or CockroachDB]
  - `quarkus-reactive-mysql-client` for link:https://vertx.io/docs/vertx-mysql-client/java[MySQL or MariaDB]

>   - `quarkus-reactive-mssql-client` for link:https://vertx.io/docs/vertx-mssql-client/java[MS SQL Server]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `quarkus-reactive-mssql-client` for link:https://vertx.io/docs/vertx-mssql-client/java[Microsoft SQL Server]
```

>   - `quarkus-reactive-db2-client` for link:https://vertx.io/docs/vertx-db2-client/java[Db2]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `quarkus-reactive-db2-client` for link:https://vertx.io/docs/vertx-db2-client/java[IBM Db2]
```

> 

Reviewer: I think we have an Oracle driver now too.

Also I wonder if you should link to https://quarkus.io/guides/reactive-sql-clients instead of the Vert.x doc.

Author: You are right, I will change a bit this

Author: I've updated the section, let me know if it's better.

Reviewer: AFAICS, you haven't added the Oracle one?

Also, there are other comments you didn't see: see https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/22988/files for all of them.

Author: We haven't release the Oracle integration yet

Reviewer: Ah, it requires some work in HR? I thought having the client around would be enough.

Author: I wish :)

Scaffolding apart, there is usually some custom logic needed because the reactive SQL clients don't follow a specific standard and sometimes they behave differently than what we expect.

At the moment, we are waiting for some fixes in Vert.x but I think I'm going to release it anyway next time and document the limitations.

Reviewer: OK, thanks for the explanations!

[source,xml]
.Example dependencies using Maven
----
<dependencies>

>     <!-- Hibernate Reactive specific dependencies -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <!-- Hibernate Reactive dependency -->
```

    <dependency>
        <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
        <artifactId>quarkus-hibernate-reactive</artifactId>
    </dependency>

>     <!-- Vert.x SQL client for PostgreSQL -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <!-- Reactive SQL client for PostgreSQL -->
```

    <dependency>
        <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
        <artifactId>quarkus-reactive-pg-client</artifactId>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>
----

Annotate your persistent objects with `@Entity`,

> then add the relevant configuration properties in `{config-file}`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
then add the relevant configuration properties in `{config-file}`:
```

[source,properties]
.Example `{config-file}`
----
# datasource configuration
quarkus.datasource.db-kind = postgresql
quarkus.datasource.username = quarkus_test
quarkus.datasource.password = quarkus_test

quarkus.datasource.reactive.url = vertx-reactive:postgresql://localhost/quarkus_test <1>

# drop and create the database at startup (use `update` to only update the schema)
quarkus.hibernate-orm.database.generation=drop-and-create
----

<1> The only different property from a Hibernate ORM configuration

Note that these configuration properties are not the same ones as in your typical Hibernate Reactive configuration file.
They will often map to Hibernate Reactive configuration properties but could have different names and don't necessarily map 1:1 to each other.

Also, Quarkus will set many Hibernate Reactive configuration settings automatically, and will often use more modern defaults.

WARNING: Configuring Hibernate Reactive using the standard `persistence.xml` configuration file is not supported.

Please, see section <<hr-configuration-properties, Hibernate Reactive configuration properties>> for the list of properties you can set in `{config-file}`.

> A `Mutinty.SessionFactory` will be created based on the Quarkus `datasource` configuration as long as the Hibernate Reactive extension is listed among your project dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `Mutiny.SessionFactory` will be created based on the Quarkus `datasource` configuration as long as the Hibernate Reactive extension is listed among your project dependencies.
```

> The dialect will be selected based on the Vert.x SQL client - unless you set one explicitly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dialect will be selected based on the Reactive SQL client - unless you set one explicitly.
```

You can then happily inject your `Mutiny.SessionFactory`:

[source,java]
.Example application bean using Hibernate Reactive
----
@ApplicationScoped
public class SantaClausService {
    @Inject
    Mutiny.SessionFactory sf; <1>

    public Uni<Void> createGift(String giftDescription) {
	Gift gift = new Gift();
        gift.setName(giftDescription);
	return sf.withTransaction(session -> session.persist(gift)) <2>
    }
}
----

<1> Inject your session factory and have fun

> <2> `.withTransaction` will automatically flush at commit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<2> `.withTransaction()` will automatically flush at commit
```

[source,java]
.Example of an Entity
----
@Entity
public class Gift {
    private Long id;
    private String name;

    @Id
    @SequenceGenerator(name = "giftSeq", sequenceName = "gift_id_seq", allocationSize = 1, initialValue = 1)
    @GeneratedValue(generator = "giftSeq")
    public Long getId() {
        return id;
    }

    public void setId(Long id) {
        this.id = id;
    }

    public String getName() {
        return name;
    }

    public void setName(String name) {
        this.name = name;
    }
}
----

> To load SQL statements when Hibernate Reactive starts, add an `import.sql` file to the root of your resources directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To load SQL statements when Hibernate Reactive starts, add an `import.sql` file in your `src/main/resources/` directory.
```

This script can contain any SQL DML statements.
Make sure to terminate each statement with a semicolon.

This is useful to have a data set ready for your tests or demos.

> WARNING: Make sure to wrap methods modifying your database (e.g. `session.persist(entity)`) within a transaction. 

Reviewer: I think this warning is a bit misplaced? It has nothing to do with the `import.sql`.

[[hr-configuration-properties]]
=== Hibernate Reactive configuration properties

There are various optional properties useful to refine your session factory or guide Quarkus' guesses.

> When no property is set, Quarkus can typically infer everything it needs to setup Hibernate Reactive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When no properties are set, Quarkus can typically infer everything it needs to setup Hibernate Reactive
```

[TIP]
====
Want to start a PostgreSQL server on the side with Docker?

[source,bash]
----
docker run --rm --name postgres-quarkus-hibernate -e POSTGRES_USER=quarkus_test \
           -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=quarkus_test -e POSTGRES_DB=quarkus_test \
           -p 5432:5432 postgres:14.1
----

This will start a non-durable empty database: ideal for a quick experiment!
====

[[hr-cdi-integration]]
==== CDI integration

If you are familiar with using Hibernate Reactive in Quarkus, you probably already have injected the `Mutiny.SessionFactory` using CDI:

[source,java]
----
@Inject
Mutiny.SessionFactory sessionFactory;
----

This will inject the `Mutiny.SessionFactory` of the default persistence unit.

You can also inject an instance of `Uni<Mutiny.Session>` using the exact same mechanism:

[source,java]
----
@Inject
Uni<Mutiny.Session> session;
----

[[hr-limitations]]
== Limitations and other things you should know

Quarkus does not modify the libraries it uses; this rule applies to Hibernate Reactive as well: when using
this extension you will mostly have the same experience as using the original library.

> But while they share the same code, Quarkus does configure some components automatically and injects custom implementations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But while they share the same code, Quarkus does configure some components automatically and inject custom implementations
```
(given you use `does`, it's probably better)

for some extension points; this should be transparent and useful but if you're an expert of Hibernate Reactive you might want to
know what is being done.

Here's a list of things to pay attention when using Hibernate Reactive in Quarkus:

> * it's not possible to configure multiple persitence units at the moment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* it's not possible to configure multiple persistence units at the moment
```

* it's not configurable via a `persistence.xml` file

> * integration with the Enverse extension is not supported

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* integration with the Envers extension is not supported
```
